.TH ZYTERM 1 "2026-06" "zyterm 1.3.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zyterm \- high-performance RTOS serial terminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zyterm
[\fIoptions\fR] \fIdevice\fR
.br
.B zyterm
\fB\-\-replay\fR \fIlogfile\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zyterm
is a fast, single-binary serial terminal for embedded / RTOS development on
Linux. It targets parity with \fBminicom\fR(1), \fBpicocom\fR(1) and
\fBtio\fR(1) for everyday tasks while adding a built-in HUD, scrollback
search, JSONL logging, an HTTP/SSE bridge for browsers, and hot-plug-aware
USB port discovery.
.PP
\fIdevice\fR is normally a serial node (e.g. \fI/dev/ttyUSB0\fR), but may
also be a network URL:
.RS
.TP
.BR tcp:// \fIhost\fR : \fIport\fR
Raw TCP connection (e.g. \fBser2net\fR(8) configured for raw mode).
.TP
.BR telnet:// \fIhost\fR : \fIport\fR
TCP plus Telnet IAC escape on the wire (outgoing 0xFF is doubled, incoming
WILL/WONT/DO/DONT and sub-negotiations are stripped).
.TP
.BR rfc2217:// \fIhost\fR : \fIport\fR
Reserved for future RFC\ 2217 (Telnet COM-PORT-OPTION) support; currently
exits with a pointer to the \fBser2net\fR raw + \fBtcp://\fR workaround.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Connection
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-baud " " \fIrate\fR
Baud rate (default 115200). Arbitrary baud is supported via \fBtermios2\fR
(BOTHER) and ignored on socket transports.
.TP
.BR \-\-data " " { 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 }
Data bits (default 8).
.TP
.BR \-\-parity " " { n | e | o }
Parity: none, even, or odd (default n).
.TP
.BR \-\-stop " " { 1 | 2 }
Stop bits (default 1).
.TP
.BR \-\-flow " " { n | r | x }
Flow control: none, RTS/CTS, or XON/XOFF (default n).
.TP
.B \-\-reconnect ", " \-\-no\-reconnect
Auto-reopen the device on hang-up. Default is on.
.TP
.BI \-\-port\-glob " pattern"
Re-resolve \fIdevice\fR via a shell glob on every reconnect attempt
(e.g. \fI"/dev/ttyUSB*"\fR). When given, the positional \fIdevice\fR
argument becomes optional. Useful for FT232 / CH340 dongles that come
back as a different \fBttyUSBn\fR after a replug.
.TP
.BI \-\-match\-vid\-pid " V:P"
Filter discovered devices by USB vendor:product (hex, e.g. \fB0403:6001\fR
for FT232R). Walks \fI/sys\fR; no libudev dependency. Combine with
\fB\-\-port\-glob\fR or use alone to scan default candidates
(\fI/dev/ttyUSB*\fR, \fI/dev/ttyACM*\fR, \fI/dev/serial/by\-id/*\fR).
.SS Line endings
.TP
.BI \-\-map\-out " mode"
Rewrite outgoing line endings.
\fImode\fR is one of \fBnone\fR, \fBcr\fR, \fBlf\fR, \fBcrlf\fR,
\fBcr\-crlf\fR, \fBlf\-crlf\fR (default \fBnone\fR).
.TP
.BI \-\-map\-in " mode"
Rewrite incoming line endings (same modes). Stateful across read chunks.
.SS Logging
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-log " " \fIfile\fR
Append to a log file with millisecond timestamps. In the TUI, \fBCtrl+A l\fR
toggles an auto-named \fBzyterm-YYYYMMDD-NNN.txt\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-max\-kb " N"
Rotate to \fIfile\fR.1 when it exceeds N KB.
.TP
.B \-\-replay " " \fIlogfile\fR
Replay a previously captured log instead of opening a device.
.SS Help
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show full usage and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.PP
The full option list is shown by \fBzyterm \-\-help\fR; this page covers
the most common flags.
.SH INTERACTIVE KEYS
.TP
.B Ctrl+A
Command menu (q/x/p/e/c/h/t/b/s/f/r//?).
.TP
.B F1..F12
Fire bound macros (see \fB\-\-macro\fR).
.TP
.B PgUp / PgDn
Scroll back and forward through scrollback.
.TP
.B Tab
Remote completion (sync-and-flush).
.TP
.B Ctrl+L / Ctrl+C
Clear screen / send ETX to remote.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Open a USB serial dongle at 115200 baud:
.PP
.RS
.B zyterm /dev/ttyUSB0
.RE
.PP
Open whatever CH340 is currently plugged in, and find it again on replug:
.PP
.RS
.B zyterm \-\-match\-vid\-pid 1a86:7523
.RE
.PP
Connect to a remote serial server (\fBser2net\fR raw mode):
.PP
.RS
.B zyterm tcp://lab\-pi.local:23000
.RE
.PP
Send LF as CRLF (Windows-style firmware shells):
.PP
.RS
.B zyterm \-\-map\-out crlf /dev/ttyACM0
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/zyterm/<name>.conf
Profiles loaded by \fB\-\-profile\fR and written by \fB\-\-profile\-save\fR
(honours \fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME\fR).
.PP
Line-edit history and scrollback bookmarks are held in memory only; zyterm
does not write a history or bookmarks file.
.SH SECURITY
zyterm trusts the user who runs it; it is not designed to be exposed to a
network. Two surfaces widen that boundary and are hardened accordingly:
.TP
.B HTTP bridge (\-\-http)
Binds loopback only. The write routes
.RB ( "POST /tx" ", " "POST /api/send" )
and the streaming reads
.RB ( /ws ", " /stream )
pin
.I Host
and
.I Origin
to a loopback literal, so a cross-site page or a DNS-rebound host cannot
drive the device or read its output. Set
.BI \-\-http\-token " tok"
to additionally require
.I "Authorization: Bearer tok"
on the write routes \(em recommended before tunnelling or proxying the port
beyond loopback.
.B \-\-http\-cors
adds CORS headers for read-only
.B GET
/
.B OPTIONS
only.
.TP
.B Detach and metrics sockets (\-\-detach, \-\-metrics)
Created under
.B $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR
when set, mode
.BR 0600 ,
and accept only peers whose uid matches yours
.RB ( SO_PEERCRED ).
.TP
.B Device output
Untrusted RX is filtered before it reaches your terminal. By default a
bounded SGR-only filter lets device colour render while clipboard (OSC\ 52),
title, cursor and every other escape are shown as inert caret notation, so a
hostile device cannot hijack the clipboard, set the title, or spoof the
screen. Use
.B \-\-no\-sgr
for strict deny-all (colour neutralized too). Full raw passthrough
.RB ( Ctrl+A\ G )
and
.B \-\-trusted
(raw rendering in the managed view plus the fast legacy Tab echo-capture, for a
device you trust) are separate, off-by-default opt-ins that reopen this surface.
.PP
See
.B SECURITY.md
in the source tree for the full posture and reporting process.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR minicom (1),
.BR picocom (1),
.BR tio (1),
.BR ser2net (8),
.BR setserial (8)
.SH BUGS
Report at <https://github.com/iskandarputra/zyterm/issues>.
.SH AUTHOR
Iskandar Putra <www.iskandarputra.com>
